ilab model engine proposal (#48)
instructlab/dev-docs: docs/ilab-model-engine.md

# Redesign `ilab` Command Structure to be Resource Based

This document describes a new structure for `ilab`, consisting of sub-commands that act as parent or "group" commands for further sub-commands. Currently the only group command is `ilab`. If the models `ilab` produces are meant to be the golden standard for open source AI, the tool to use and manage these models needs to be fully-fledged and extensible, especially for models we have not produced but should be able to run.

open source container tools like [podman](https://podman.io/) and [docker](https://www.docker.com/) are commonly viewed as engines. `ilab` should be a model engine, managing the deployment and creation of AI models. To be clear, I will be using tools like podman as a structural analogy here with full understanding they have different implications and use-cases.

## Key Component

### InstructLab Structure Redesign

> Here are a few outlines. The first two that represent the state of `ilab` before/after this enhancement and the third describes `ilab` after I introduce new key commands to this structure. I am including the second outline for clarity purposes, but this EP only covers the contents of the first structure.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here are two outlines. They represent the state of `ilab` before/after this enhancement.
```

```console
ilab
|
|_____chat
|_____check
|_____convert
|_____download
|_____generate
|_____init
|_____list
|_____serve
|_____test
|_____train
```

vs. after:

```console
ilab
|
|_______model
|       |
|       |____convert
|       |____download
|       |____train (--convert)
|       |____serve   (-i)
|       |____chat
|       |____evaluate
|       |
|_______data
|       |
|       |____generate
|       |
|_______config
|       |
|       |____init
|       |

> |_______tax

Reviewer: Minor nit -- would prefer `taxonomy` instead of the shorthand `tax`

|       |
|       |____diff
|       |____check
|       |____download
```

> Note: -i will serve and start a chat process as opposed to the current flow which implicitly starts servers in certain commands

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Note: `-i` will serve and start a chat process as opposed to the current flow which implicitly starts servers in certain commands
```

Reviewer: Agree that this is a separate feature

Author: sure, I can remove this

The main point of this structure is to introduce a resource based hierarchy and to improve the usability of the existing `ilab` structure. At the top level of commands, we are not thinking about verbs but resources commonly managed in `ilab`, under them fall some actions. Some key things missing in `ilab` currently are:

1. Ambiguity in "what" we are generating, training etc.
    - The current structure of `ilab` requires an in-depth knowledge of the ordering of commands and background knowledge for how our CLI is built. This is not the best way to grow. Commands that are not intuitive and require a deep dive into the docs just to get started might not engage users as we hope to. Having an intuitive structure in which people can see easily from the docstring what each command does and how they might use them, makes more sense. We are generating data, then training a model, running a server to interact with that model, then finally chatting with the model

> 2. Some commands like `ilab test` and `ilab list` should be renamed to show their true purpose (`ilab model evaluate`and `ilab taxonomy diff`)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Some commands like `ilab test` and `ilab list` should be renamed to show their true purpose (`ilab model evaluate` and `ilab taxonomy diff`)
```

### General workflow as compared to alternatives

currently one has to:

1. `ilab init`
2. `ilab download`
3. `ilab serve`
4. `ilab generate`
5. `ilab train`
6. `ilab convert`
7. `ilab serve --model XXX`
8. `ilab chat`

how to use `ilab` with this new structure:

1. `ilab config init`
2. `ilab model download`
3. `ilab data generate`
4. `ilab model train --convert`
5. `ilab model serve -i` (or followed by `ilab model chat`)

> 

Reviewer 3: So if I apply the enhancements like -i and ensure a server for generate (and chaining) it would be:
`ilab init download generate train --convert serve -i`.  (maybe -i should be --chat)

So, removal of steps is separate from the redesign. I guess the argument here is that adding more words to the commands adds clarity.  Not sure that's really good thing but...

I do, however, agree with the sub-module cli design so we're good.

So, not only do we remove one of the steps (with `-i`) for most users, but it is actually clear what is happening. For example, one may ask: "What does `ilab init` do?" while `ilab config init` clearly initializes the CLI's config. A more clear example is `ilab generate`. Are we generating a model? A config? No, we are generating *data*: `ilab data generate`.

## Changes to Existing flow

The current `ilab` commands will still work. Users will be able to type commands like `ilab model train` or `ilab train` for the foreseeable future to ensure feature parity. Eventually, this alias should be removed, and only the sub-commands should probably exist.

## Known Issues

### click

> click doesn't like the setup we currently have in `ilab`. So, adding sub-parent commands won't be as easy as creating a new `click.group`. We will need to make different libraries, each of which is a click group most likely.

Reviewer 3: If click is bad at this, is argparse better?

Also the "different libraries" comment is not clear to me and makes me concerned about how restructuring for click might be different than restructuring for future API or for general good structure.

Reviewer 4: @cdoern I second that using groups might not be straightforward and the current `lab.py` might require a bit of remodeling but I think the statement "adding sub-parent commands won't be as easy as creating a new `click.group`" is a bit misleading. Implementing something like `ilab foo bar --baz` is possible :). I'm not sure why we need to make different libraries. Thanks!

# Redesign ilab to be a Full Fledged Model Engine

> This document describes a new structure for ilab, consisting of sub-commands that act as parent or "group" commands for further sub-commands. Currently the only group command is `ilab`. If the models `ilab` produces are meant to be the golden standard for Open source AI, the tool to use and manage these models needs to be full fledged and extensible, especially to models we have not produced but should be able to run.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This document describes a new structure for `ilab`, consisting of sub-commands that act as parent or "group" commands for further sub-commands. Currently the only group command is `ilab`. If the models `ilab` produces are meant to be the golden standard for open source AI, the tool to use and manage these models needs to be fully-fledged and extensible, especially for models we have not produced but should be able to run.
```

Open source container tools like [podman](https://podman.io/) and [docker](https://www.docker.com/) are commonly viewed as engines. `ilab` should be a model engine, managing the deployment and creation of AI models. To be clear, I will be using tools like podman as a structural analogy here with full understanding they have different implications and use-cases.

## Key Component

### InstructLab Structure Redesign

Here are a few outlines. The first two that represent the state of `ilab` before/after this enhancement and the third describes `ilab` after I introduce new key commands to this structure. I am including the second outline for clarity purposes, but this EP only covers the contents of the first structure.

```console
ilab
|
|_____chat
|_____check
|_____convert
|_____download
|_____generate
|_____init
|_____list
|_____serve
|_____test
|_____train
```

vs. after:

```console

> ilab

Reviewer 5: I would say we should have those on an API resource level with OpenAPI and then have swagger to generate the CLI according. Otherwise, it would be very hard to make it api driven in the future,

Reviewer 3: I'm also concerned we will want to restructure the CLI again once we have an API spec

|
|_______model
|       |
|       |____convert
|       |____download
|       |____train (--convert)

> |       |____serve   (-i)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
|       |____serve (-i)
```

Reviewer 2: Also, what is `-i` for @cdoern? Assume it's shorthand for `interact` or something of the like based on context clues elsewhere in the document (if I'm missing somewhere it's explicitly defined lmk)

Author: yep, I think I specify it implicitly below but will add a note.

Reviewer 2: @cdoern spacing here still needs to be fixed

|       |____chat
|       |____evaluate
|       |
|_______data
|       |
|       |____generate
|       |
|_______config
|       |
|       |____init
|       |
|_______tax
|       |
|       |____diff
|       |____check
|       |____download
```

The main point of this structure is to introduce a group hierarchy and to improve the usability of the existing `ilab` structure. Some key things missing in `ilab` currently are:

1. `ilab init` does too many things.

>     - We don't want "black box" commands. This creates bad UX and also ties too many processes together in which one might eventually need to be changed.

Reviewer: It's not clear that the proposal changes this at all.  `ilab init` is just `ilab config init`. It seems like a distraction.

Author: Good point, this was an old reasoning anyway, will remove

> 2. ambiguity in "what" we are generating, training etc.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. Ambiguity in "what" we are generating, training etc.
```

>     - The current structure of `ilab` requires an in depth knowledge of the ordering of commands and background knowledge for how our CLI is built. This is not the best way to grow. Commands that are not intuitive and require a deep dive into the docs just to get started might not engage users as we hope to. Having an intuitive structure in which people can see easily from the docstring what each commands does and how they might use them, makes more sense. We are generating data, then training a model, running a server to interact with that model, then finally chatting with the model

Author: I think this should be kept. The point of this redesign is to make it more clear what is being acted on.

>     - The current structure of `ilab` requires an in depth knowledge of the ordering of commands and background knowledge for how our CLI is built. This is not the best way to grow. Commands that are not intuitive and require a deep dive into the docs just to get started might not engage users as we hope to. Having an intuitive structure in which people can see easily from the docstring what each commands does and how they might use them, makes more sense. We are generating data, then training a model, running a server to interact with that model, then finally chatting with the model

Reviewer 2: Also in favor of keeping this passage, with Russell's text suggestions

3. Some commands like `ilab test` and `ilab list` should be renamed to show their true purpose (`ilab model evaluate`and `ilab taxonomy diff`)

> 4. We will hit a point where we want to add more commands to `ilab` due to expected integration with the backend, model registries etc. This list will grow to a point where this form of top group organization is not maintainable.

Reviewer 2: @cdoern these are great points and excellent justification as to why this change is needed

Author: thanks!

> In general, moving to this structure allows for more growth when `ilab` reaches a stable release and encourages broader usage of the tool for all sorts of Open source AI models.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In general, moving to this structure allows for more growth when `ilab` reaches a stable release and encourages broader usage of the tool for all sorts of open source AI models.
```

> Outside the scope of this EP, but still important in the near future, the following structure is preferred:

Author: sure

```console
ilab
|
|_______model
|       |
|       |____quantize *
|       |____convert
|       |____download
|       |____train (--convert)
|       |____top *
|       |____serve   (-i)
|       |____chat
|       |____evaluate
|       |____push *
|       |____rm *
|       |____ls *
|       |____tag *
|       |
|_______data
|       |____generate
|       |____mix *
|       |
|_______config
|       |
|       |____create *
|       |____edit *
|       |____rm *
|       |
|_______tax
|       |
|       |____diff
|       |____check
|       |____download
```

The starred commands are new, and will be dealt with in another enhancement.

#### Goals for 5/30/2024 milestone release of CLI

> For the next few milestones, it has been identified that the overall structure shift should be in place. We should aim to have the base hierarchy of commands in place that will exist for the future of `ilab` so that when users become familiar with the CLI, it does not change radically soon after launch.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For the next few milestones, it has been identified that the overall structure shift should be in place. We should aim to have the base hierarchy of commands in place that will exist for the future of `ilab` so that when users become familiar with the CLI, further drastic changes are not needed.
```

since the project has already launched

Reviewer 2: Unless you mean 1.0 launch @cdoern?

Author: no, this is an old sentence (this EP has been around for a while :) )

The primary focus here should be the `ilab model` group. The other ones should not be treated as blockers for launch, but would be nice to have.

Another key change that should be included is a switch to using `/var/lib/models` as a model store and `$HOME/.config/models/ilab.conf` for the new configuration path. Keeping config and models in the CWD does not map well to the importance of these two pieces. This will allow `ilab config` commands to act on a global level per-user. Models will be a system-wide directory as they are with most other applications of this type.

This means we will now have commands that have a parent group `ilab` followed by a sub-command/group terminated by a grandchild command: `ilab model list` for example. This workflow not only adds purposeful organization to this project, but will encourage contributors to add commands as they use `ilab`, and file bugs in specific parts of the codebase that need work as opposed to the current flow which is hard to keep track of from a user's point of view.

### Necessity of a input -> configuration -> result mental model

> The commands uncovered by adding this structure resemble the typical architecture for an "engine". `ilab` is not complete without the mechanisms to create, list, delete, and inspect the models. Models, as container images do in container engines, act as the configuration for the end result: the chat process. The interesting thing about this analogy, is that there needs to be a pre-cursor to configuration as well. There is the container image, the container, and the Containerfile. The Containerfile is the raw user input that leads to an image.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The commands uncovered by adding this structure resemble the typical architecture for an "engine". `ilab` is not complete without the mechanisms to create, list, delete, and inspect the models. Models, as container images do in container engines, act as the configuration for the end result: the chat process. The interesting thing about this analogy, is that there needs to be a pre-cursor to configuration as well. There is the container image, the container, and the `Containerfile`. The `Containerfile` is the raw user input that leads to an image.
```

`ilab` needs to have a clear source of information, a result of compiling this source, and a "running" end result. Having these three steps purposefully delineated creates the need for commands in which users to manipulate and act upon each of these step.

The mental model a user has impacts the way they use the application and whether they view it as a Proof Of Concept.

Here is a diagram of what I mean when I describe this mental model:

```console
SOURCE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              SINK

        User has un-commited changes in their taxonomy                          Data is generated and then the user runs                               A model is created, and the user can tag the model               After converting the model, the

>         or specifies `--skill` `--knowledge` in the                 ==>        `ilab model train` using the newly generated data       ==>             or just list it using the new model commands            ==>      user runs the chat procces by specifying `ilab  model serve -i` or `ilab model serve` followed by `ilab model chat

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        or specifies `--skill` `--knowledge` in the                 ==>        `ilab model train` using the newly generated data       ==>             or just list it using the new model commands            ==>      user runs the chat procces by specifying `ilab model serve -i` or `ilab model serve` followed by `ilab model chat
```

        new `ilab data generate`

```

> So in `ilab` the clear source of information is taxonomy, or the new skills/knowledge brought into generate. This data then goes through processes that end up in the sink, which is a running/actionable process which the user can interact with. Providing commands that clearly display these different process is key. Groups for these larger "buckets" of processes makes sense as well due to the likelihood of more commands being needed to properly interact with the newly generated model.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So in `ilab`, the clear source of information is the taxonomy, or the new skills/knowledge brought into generate. This data then goes through processes that end up in the sink, which is a running/actionable process which the user can interact with. Providing commands that clearly display these different processes is key. Groups for these larger "buckets" of processes make sense as well due to the likelihood of more commands being needed to properly interact with the newly generated model.
```

### Alternatives

An alternative flow to `ilab` -> `child-command` -> `grandchild-command` is:

`ilab` -> `verb` -> `noun`. The positive to this approach is commands would sound better: `ilab generate data`. However there are a few negatives. While this is easier to say, it makes less sense from an organizational standpoint:

```console
ilab
|
|_______download__|
|_______convert___|-----model
|_______train_____|
```

This structure works when commands are ALL linked to the same `verb`. What happens when a group like `download` gets a command that the others don't? Then it looks more like this:

```console
ilab
|
|_______download
|       |____model
|       |____taxonomy
|_______convert
|       |_____model
|_______train
|       |_____model
```

This is opposed to the structure in this EP, which might have a duplicate here and there for something like `download`, but in this structure duplicate commands are the norm and will result in a larger and clunkier codebase that is confusing to read.

> This first structure looks nice, and `ilab download model` sounds nice. However in terms of implementation, this makes little sense. in [click](https://click.palletsprojects.com/en/8.1.x/), the cli library we use, `ilab` is a "group" that commands are currently "grouped under". In this Model, `ilab` would be a group, `download`, `convert` etc would be a sub-group, and `model` would be a command under ALL of these groups. This would require an implementation of the `model` function in different packages all linking to a different group parent. From the perspective of user contributions and general code readability doesn't make much sense. Part of this design is to encourage user contributions by making the structure of the codebase logical. While these commands make the commands sound better, they make them harder to group, and understand.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This first structure looks nice, and `ilab download model` sounds nice. However in terms of implementation, this makes little sense. In [click](https://click.palletsprojects.com/en/8.1.x/), the CLI library we use, `ilab` is a "group" that commands are currently "grouped under". In this Model, `ilab` would be a group, `download`, `convert` etc would be a sub-group, and `model` would be a command under ALL of these groups. This would require an implementation of the `model` function in different packages all linking to a different group parent. From the perspective of user contributions and general code readability doesn't make much sense. Part of this design is to encourage user contributions by making the structure of the codebase logical. While these commands make the commands sound better, they make them harder to group, and understand.
```

### General workflow as compared to alternatives

currently one has to:

1. `ilab init`
2. `ilab download`
3. `ilab serve`
4. `ilab generate`
5. `ilab train`
6. `ilab convert`
7. `ilab serve --model XXX`
8. `ilab chat`

how to use `ilab` with this new structure:

1. `ilab config init`
2. `ilab model download`
3. `ilab data generate`
4. `ilab model train --convert`
5. `ilab model serve -i` (or followed by `ilab model chat`)

> So, not only we do remove one of the steps (with -i) for most users, but it is actually clear what is happening. For example one may ask: What does `ilab init` do? While `ilab config init` clearly is initializing the config of the cli. A more clear example even is: `ilab generate`. Are we generating a model? A config? No we are generating *data*: `ilab data generate`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
So, not only we do remove one of the steps (with `-i`) for most users, but it is actually clear what is happening. For example one may ask: What does `ilab init` do? While `ilab config init` clearly is initializing the config of the cli. A more clear example even is: `ilab generate`. Are we generating a model? A config? No we are generating *data*: `ilab data generate`.
```

> So, not only we do remove one of the steps (with -i) for most users, but it is actually clear what is happening. For example one may ask: What does `ilab init` do? While `ilab config init` clearly is initializing the config of the cli. A more clear example even is: `ilab generate`. Are we generating a model? A config? No we are generating *data*: `ilab data generate`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So, not only do we remove one of the steps (with `-i`) for most users, but it is actually clear what is happening. For example, one may ask: "What does `ilab init` do?" while `ilab config init` clearly initializes the CLI's config. A more clear example is `ilab generate`. Are we generating a model? A config? No, we are generating *data*: `ilab data generate`.
```

## Changes to Existing flow

> The current `ilab` commands will still work. Users will be able to type commands like `ilab model train` or `ilab train` for the foreseeable future to ensure feature parity. Eventually, this alias should be removed, and only the sub-commands should probably exist.

Reviewer 2: We should target an explicit release to do so (outside of this general proposal, in our usual planning meetings/channels)

Reviewer 3: we'll have to revisit having 2 ways of doing everything for sure.  I guess it is comforting to suggest we a dual path for transition.

# Redesign ilab to be a Full Fledged Model Engine

> This documents describes a new structure for ilab, consisting of sub-commands that act as parent or "group" commands. Currently the only group command is `ilab`. If the models `ilab` produces are meant to be the golden standard for open source AI, the tool to use and manage these models needs to be full fledged and extensible, especially to models we have not produced but should be able to run.

Author: they are children to `ilab` but parents to the further children commands. I will specify this in the ep

> open source container tools like podman an docker are commonly viewed as engines. `ilab` should be a model engine, managing the deployment and creation of AI models. To be clear, I will be using tools like podman as a structural analogy here with full understanding they have different implications and use-cases.

Reviewer 6: Add links to podman and docker. It makes it easier for users who might not know.

## Key Component

### InstructLab Structure Redesign

Here are two outlines. One that represents the state of `ilab` after this enhancement and the second describes `ilab` after I introduce new key commands to this structure. I am including the second outline for clarity purposes, but this EP only covers the contents of the first structure.

```console
ilab
|
|_______model
|       |
|       |____convert
|       |____download
|       |____train (--convert)
|       |____serve   (-i)
|       |____chat

> |       |____inference 

Author: @khaledsulayman @alimaredia and others feel inference makes more sense. I tend to agree since inference is a more "ai" term than test (from what I know)

```

vs. currently:

```console
ilab
|
|_____chat
|_____check
|_____convert
|_____download
|_____generate
|_____init
|_____list
|_____serve
|_____test
|_____train
```

The main point of this structure is to introduce a group hierarchy and to remove some confusions of the existing `ilab` structure. Some key things missing in `ilab` currently are:

1. `ilab init` does too many things.
    - We don't want "black box" commands. This creates bad UX and also ties too many processes together in which one might eventually need to be changed.
2. ambiguity in "what" we are generating, training etc.
    - The current structure of `ilab` requires an in depth knowledge of the ordering of commands and background knowledge for how our CLI is built. This is not the best way to grow. Commands that are not intuitive and require a deep dive into the docs just to get started might not engage users as we hope to. having an intuitive structure in which people can see easily from the docstring what each commands does and how they might use them, makes more sense. We are generating data, then training a model, running a server to interact with that model, then finally chatting with the model

> 3. some commands like `ilab test` and `ilab list` should be renamed to show their true purpose (`ilab model inference`and `ilab taxonomy diff`)

Author: @khaledsulayman @alimaredia WDYT?

> 3. some commands like `ilab test` and `ilab list` should be renamed to show their true purpose (`ilab model inference`and `ilab taxonomy diff`)

Reviewer 7: what about `evaluate`? I know this is a very minimal test compared to our full-scale model evaluation but I think it would help to a) differentiate from code testing and b) mirror some of the other subcommands which mostly seem to be more minimal versions of the larger operations we run on the backend

> 3. some commands like `ilab test` and `ilab list` should be renamed to show their true purpose (`ilab model inference`and `ilab taxonomy diff`)

Reviewer 7: additionally, I do think, minimal as it currently is, evaluation is _really_ what the current `ilab test` is actually doing, and maybe by being more explicit about the correlation between this and the backend version, we can start to think about what is minimal enough within the backend to incorporate into the CLI

> 3. some commands like `ilab test` and `ilab list` should be renamed to show their true purpose (`ilab model inference`and `ilab taxonomy diff`)

Author: the only issue with `evaluate` is we might overload that later on with actual eval if we expose from the cli

> 3. some commands like `ilab test` and `ilab list` should be renamed to show their true purpose (`ilab model inference`and `ilab taxonomy diff`)

Reviewer 7: Discussed with Charlie in person but just to update @hickeyma I think that's the point. The CLI is really meant to be a laptop version of the backend pipeline we are building, so having the flow of the CLI mirror it is a plus.

If we feel like the functionality currently handled by `ilab test` is still too minimal to be called evaluation, even for running on a laptop, then we can scope out future work to beef it up as desired.

> 3. some commands like `ilab test` and `ilab list` should be renamed to show their true purpose (`ilab model inference`and `ilab taxonomy diff`)

Author: switched to evaluate

4. we will hit a point where we want to add more commands to `ilab` due to expected integration with the backend, model registries etc. This list will grow to a point where this form of top group organization is not maintainable.

> In general, moving to this structure allows for more growth when `ilab` launches publicly and encourages broader usage of the tool for all sorts of open source AI models.

Author: the public launch is outdated, will replace with something about stability.

in terms of all sorts of models I was just trying to indicate ilab shouldn't be tailored just to granite and merlinite.

```console
ilab
|
|_______model
|       |
|       |____quantize *
|       |____convert
|       |____download
|       |____train (--convert)
|       |____top *
|       |____serve   (-i)
|       |____chat
|       |____inference
|       |____push *
|       |____rm *
|       |____ls *
|       |____tag *
|       |
|_______data
|       |____generate
|       |____mix *
|       |
|_______config
|       |
|       |____create *
|       |____edit *
|       |____rm *
|       |
|_______tax
|       |
|       |____diff
|       |____check
|       |____download
```

The starred commands are new, and will be dealt with in another enhancement.

#### Goals for End of May release in CLI

For the next few milestones, it has been identified that the overall structure shift should be in place. We should aim to have the vague hierarchy of commands in place that will exist for the future of `ilab` so that when users become familiar with the CLI, it does not change radically soon after launch.

The primary focus here should be the `ilab model` group. The other ones should not be treated as blockers for launch, but would be nice to have.

> Another key change that should be included is a switch to using `/var/lib/models` as a model store and `$HOME/.config/models/ilab.conf` for the new configuration path. Keeping config and models in the CWD does not map well to the importance of these two pieces. This will allow `ilab config` commands to act on a global level per-user. Models will be a system-wide directory as they are with most other applications of this type.

Reviewer 6: Do we want global config? The thinking from the start is that a user can create multiple independent project s on their system, similar to OperatorSDK.

Author: I think global model store and config makes sense.

At least global model store IMO, but if you have that it makes sense to have a global config pointing to this model store.

The way we use config today is really limited, most users override 90% of the config per ilab run, so having duplicates all around the system doesn't rly make sense anymore.

Reviewer 2: Agree with Charlie - I think we can start with a global config, but we can always enhance later for users to have options to create separate "projects" (there's some existing work for something like that here https://github.com/instructlab/instructlab/pull/1022)

Reviewer: I would prefer to remove this from this proposal. Changing the CLI command structure is not dependent on making this configuration management change.

Reviewer 8: There are some thorny details with changing the data store, so agree that ideally its split out into a separate proposal.

Ex:
/var/lib/models is normally not writable, so I assume maybe you were thinking XDG_DATA_HOME/ilab/models (~/.local/share/ilab/models) and XDG_CONFIG_HOME/ilab (~/.config/ilab)

Other questions are what happens if someone has two working areas, do all checkpoints end up in the model directory or do they end up in the workspace.

Also relatedly, huggingface recently abandoned this approach with a user cache directory for model, so something to think about. I agree with the goal that we probably want an easy way to share downloaded models.

Reviewer 4: It's a detail but using `/var/lib/ilab/models` is preferred.

The mental model a user has impacts the way they use the application and whether they view it as a Proof Of Concept.

Here is a diagram of what I mean when I describe this mental model:

```console
SOURCE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              SINK

        User has un-commited changes in their taxonomy                          Data is generated and then the user runs                               A model is created, and the user can tag the model               After converting the model, the
        or specifies `--skill` `--knowledge` in the                 ==>        `ilab model train` using the newly generated data       ==>             or just list it using the new model commands            ==>      user runs the chat procces by specifying `ilab  model run -i` or `ilab model run` followed by `ilab model chat

>         new `ilab data generate`

Reviewer 6: not `run`, should be `serve` in the AI domain

```

> So in `ilab` the clear source of information is taxonomy, or the new skills/knowledge brought into generate. This data then goes through processes that end up in the sink, which is a running/actionable process which the user can interact with. Providing commands that clearly display these different process is key.  groups for these larger "buckets" of processes makes sense as well due to the likelihood of more commands being needed to properly interact with the newly generated model.

Reviewer 6: .groups for --> . Groups for

### Alternatives

An alternative flow to `ilab` -> `child-command` -> `grandchild-command` is:

`ilab` -> `verb` -> `noun`. The positive to this approach is commands would sound better: `ilab generate data`. However there are a few negatives. While this is easier to say, it makes less sense from an organizational standpoint:

```console
ilab
|
|_______download__|
|_______convert___|-----model
|_______train_____|
```

This structure works when commands are ALL linked to the same `verb`. What happens when a group like `download` gets a command that the others don't? Then it looks more like this:

```console
ilab
|
|_______download
|       |____model
|       |____taxonomy
|_______convert
|       |_____model
|_______train
|       |_____model
```

This is opposed to the structure in this EP, which might have a duplicate here and there for something like `download`, but in this structure duplicate commands are the norm and will result in a larger and clunkier codebase that is confusing to read.

> This first structure looks nice, and `ilab download model` sounds nice. However in terms of implementation, this makes little sense. in `click`, the cli library we use, `ilab` is a "group" that commands are currently "grouped under". In this Model, `ilab` would be a group, `download`, `convert` etc would be a sub-group, and `model` would be a command under ALL of these groups. This would require an implementation of the `model` function in different packages all linking to a different group parent. From the perspective of user contributions and general code readability doesn't make much sense. Part of this design is to encourage user contributions by making the structure of the codebase logical. While these commands make the commands sound better, they make them harder to group, and understand.

Reviewer 6: add link to `click`

### General workflow as compared to alternatives

how to use `ilab` with this new structure:

1. `ilab config init`
2. `ilab model download`
3. `ilab data generate`
4. `ilab model train --convert`
5. `ilab model serve -i` (or followed by `ilab model chat`)

currently one has to:

1. `ilab init`
2. `ilab download`
3. `ilab serve` 
4. `ilab generate`
5. `ilab train`
7. `ilab convert`

> 8. `ilab serve --model XXX`

Reviewer 6: Like above swap and first state current flow and then the nerw proposed improved flow?
